BAŞLIK: Ask a Dietitian: Fuel Up for the Your Marathon or Half Marathon | Wingfoot Atlanta Track Club
KAYNAK: https://wingfoot.atlantatrackclub.org/blog/ask-a-dietitian-fuel-up-for-the-your-marathon-or-half-marathon
TARİH: 2026-03-08 21:19:53
KELİME: 1989
============================================================

Facebook
Twitter
LinkedIn
Email
Health & Wellness
2/09/2023
by
Alissa Palladino
Ask a Dietitian: Fuel Up for Your Marathon or Half Marathon
Nutrition plays a powerful role in successfully training for and
completing a race of any distance, and this is especially true for longer
events such as the marathon and half-marathon. While there is a lot of
individual variation and every runner must ultimately experiment to figure out
what's going to work best for them, here are some science-based guidelines and
practical strategies to help you dial in on a fueling plan to crush your race-day
goals and feel great doing it.
Macronutrients
First, the basics. All the energy, or
calories, in our diets comes from one of three macronutrients: carbohydrates,
protein and fat. While all are essential and must be consumed in balanced
amounts for optimal body functioning and overall health, carbs take the
spotlight when it comes to fueling for endurance running. The primary role of
carbs in our bodies is to provide a quick, readily available source of energy
for our muscles and other vital organs. Protein and fat take longer to digest
and support other biological processes, like muscle repair and growth, exercise
recovery, immunity, satiety, hunger management, inflammation, hormone
regulation and more.
Carbs as Performance Fuel
Carbs become increasingly important for long training runs and
races. Consuming carbs pre- and mid-run provides energy, improves endurance, delays
fatigue, prevents muscle protein break and maintains blood glucose levels.
Carbs are also the only fuel available for high intensity (anaerobic) exercise,
which experienced runners may hit when doing speed workouts or running shorter
events at "race pace."
Pre-Run Nutrition
Carbohydrates should be the focus of pre-run nutrition. Moderate
amounts of protein may also be tolerated depending on how much time you have
before your run, but typically low-fiber and low-fat foods are recommended to
prevent GI distress. The closer you are to running, the more you want to focus
on simple carbs, including various forms of sugar (yes, this is the opposite of
general healthy eating guidelines).
If you have 3 to 4 hours before your run, a balanced meal that
contains ample carbs but also some protein and fat works fine, such as a bagel
with peanut butter or a turkey sandwich. If you have 1 to 2 hours, a carb-rich
snack paired with a little bit of protein is ideal, such as a banana with
peanut butter or a small bowl of cereal with milk. If you find yourself with less
than an hour to go, stick to quick-digesting carbs such as a fig or grain-based
granola bar, pretzels, dried fruit such as raisins or apricots, graham
crackers, a pouch of instant oatmeal, toast with jelly, apple sauce or pureed
fruit. Liquid carbs such as a sports drink or juice are ideal immediately
before exercise.
Mid-Run Nutrition
On runs lasting longer than 60 minutes, it is essential to take in
fuel on the run so you can keep going after glycogen (stored carbs in the
muscle and liver) starts to get depleted. Aim for 30-60 grams of carbs per
hour, starting at the 45-minute mark to allow time for absorption. There are a
wide variety of products designed for mid-run fueling, and you can also opt for
whole food options as long as you hit the recommended amounts. Note again that
sugar, the simplest and most readily available source of carbs, is beneficial
here and not to be feared in the context of performance nutrition.
In fact, most traditional sports products such as GU gels, Clif
shot blocks, sports beans and Honey Stinger waffles are composed of sugar as
their main ingredient, typically providing 20-25 grams per serving. They are
hypertonic (meaning more concentrated than blood) and therefore are designed to
be taken with water.
Some newer and novel options available work slightly differently.
For example, UCAN contains resistant starch for a slower release of carbs that may
provide more steady energy and prevent blood sugar spikes. Maurten uses a
hydrogel aimed to provide more-sustained energy and decrease the need for
water. It also utilizes a blend of sugar types to allow for a greater intake of
carbs per hour. Huma incorporates chia seeds into its gels, providing small
amounts of fiber and protein to delay carb delivery for a more-sustained
release of energy.
Some runners prefer to fuel with honey, maple syrup, dried fruit,
fruit leathers or even candy. Individual preferences and tolerance vary greatly,
so it is important to practice during training, find what works for your body,
and then stick to your fueling strategy on race day. No matter which form you
choose, remember to get those carbs in early and often during your long runs - your
energy levels will thank you!
Keep in mind, mid-run fueling guidelines are based on time, not
distance. The longer you are out there, the more fuel you will require to keep
going feeling energized and strong, so plan and prepare accordingly. For
example, a 5-hour marathoner aiming to refuel every 45 minutes will need to
carry and consume approximately 150 to 300 grams carbs throughout their race, which
might look like up to 6 gels or equivalents, plus two servings of a
carb-containing hydration formula. The fueling plan for a 3-hour marathoner, on
the other hand, would consist of 90 to 180 grams carbs total, approximately three
to four servings of gel or equivalent and one serving of a carb-containing
hydration formula.
Post-Run Nutrition
Refueling as soon as possible after long runs, when muscles are
primed for nutrient absorption, enhances the recovery process. Your post-run
meal or snack should contain carbs to replenish glycogen stores, protein to
support muscle repair, and a small amount of healthy fats if tolerated to decrease
inflammation. Bonus if you can get in some colorful fruits and veggies for vitamins,
minerals and antioxidants.
If your post-run window corresponds with a regularly scheduled meal
time, eat a nutritious meal that contains a balance of food of groups, such as
a veggie omelet with toast (breakfast), tuna salad in whole wheat pita (lunch)
or stir-fry with rice, veggies and chicken/tofu (dinner.)
If it's going to be several hours until your next meal or your
appetite is greatly diminished, try a post-run snack such as Greek yogurt with
berries and granola, hard-boiled eggs and grapes, a protein shake with a
banana, or a fruit and yogurt smoothie.
Race-Week Fueling (Meals)
You have made it through training and are ready to dial in on your
nutrition to optimize race day success. The goal in the week or days leading up
to your marathon or half marathon is to fully load your muscles with glycogen
(stored energy.) To do so, increase the amount and proportions of carbs at each
of your meals. Try to fill half your plate with a carb-rich food such as pasta,
rice, potatoes, other grains and fruit. For example,
·
Breakfast: 2 cups of
oatmeal
made with
milk, topped with nuts and
fruit
·
Lunch: 2 cups
of spaghetti
with
meatballs, tomato sauce, and broccoli
·
Dinner: Stir fry with 2 cups of
rice
,
chicken or tofu, and mixed veggies
You can also add carb-rich snacks on the side of your meals if
needed, such as a turkey sandwich made with two slices of
bread
plus a
side of
pretzels
or a black bean burger on a
bun
with lettuce and
tomato, along with a side of
sweet potato fries.
Drink to thirst,
primarily water, aiming for pale yellow urine.
The Night Before (Dinner)
Like your race-week meals, make carbs the priority in your pre-race
dinner. But even more importantly, stick to familiar foods that you have
tolerated well during training. The night before your marathon or half marathon
is NOT the time to try anything new food wise - save that for your post-race
celebration. Hydrate with water and add electrolytes, especially if conditions are
expected to be hot and humid on race day. Or just salt your foods a bit more
heavily than usual.
Race Morning (Breakfast)
Once again, the key here is to stick with familiar foods that
worked for you during training. To get into specific numbers, the
recommendation is 1 to 4 grams of carbs per kg of body weight in the 1 to 4
hours before your marathon or half marathon, For a 150-pound (68 kg) runner,
that's 70 to 270 grams of carbs - a fairly large wide range and why you need to
practice during training to figure out what timing and amount works best your
body. Additionally, hydrate with at least 16 ounces of fluid in the 2 hours
before race start. Here are a few examples of what a pre-race breakfast would
look like with common foods at the various recommended intake levels:
●
Clif Bar and
banana =
70 grams of carbs (1 gram per kg for a 150-pound runner)
●
Bowl of
oatmeal (1 cup dry) made with 1 cup dairy or soy milk topped with ¼ cup raisins
and 1 Tbsp. honey plus 8-ounce glass of orange juice
= 135 grams of carbs (2
grams per kg for a 150-pound runner)
●
Three toaster
waffles with 2 Tbsp. maple syrup, sliced banana and ¼ cup raisins plus a Clif
bar and 8-ounce glass of orange juice =
200 grams of carbs (3 grams per kg
for an 150-pound runner)
●
Bagel with
peanut butter, 4 Tbsp. jelly and sliced banana plus 1 cup yogurt topped with ½
cup granola and 12-ounce glass of orange juice
= 270 grams of carbs (4 grams
per kg for an 150-pound runner)
Less Than 60 Minutes to Race
If you ate early, consider adding a small carb-rich snack
immediately before the race to top off energy stores. A specialty sports
product or liquid option such as Powerade may be better tolerated at this stage.
The Takeaway:
Nutrition is a powerful tool to help optimize your training and
perform to capacity on race day. 
Everyone is unique, and it may take some trial and error to figure out
what's going to work best for you and your body. Make sure to practice your
fueling strategy during training and don't try anything new on race day!
Alissa is an Atlanta-based registered dietitian nutritionist and
certified personal trainer dedicated to helping people optimize health and
athletic performance by harnessing the power of nutrition. Alissa currently
offers virtual and in-person nutrition consultations, meal planning services
and metabolic testing. Learn more at
https://alissapalladinonutrition.squarespace.com
or
contact her at
apalladinordn@gmail.com
Health & Wellness Articles
February 03, 2026
When Shin Splints Aren't "Just Shin Splints"
November 11, 2025
The Gray Area: What to Do About Lingering Post-Race Pain
July 31, 2025
Race Week Essentials: How to Stay Healthy, Ready and Strong
May 21, 2025
Five Conditions You Shouldn’t Train Through, and What to Do Instead
February 18, 2025
Race Week Nutrition: Fueling for Publix Atlanta Marathon Weekend
January 28, 2025
Fueling Your Best Race: Nutrition Strategies for the Publix Atlanta Marathon & Half Marathon
May 28, 2024
Ask a Dietitian: How to Fuel Performance and Beat the Heat
February 14, 2024
Meals for Marathoners - Fueling for Publix Atlanta Marathon Weekend
November 30, 2023
Ask A Dietitian - Easy Nutritious Ways to Support Your Immune System This Winter
November 08, 2023
Align the Mind - Here's How to Get Real About Goal-Setting
September 07, 2023
Ask a Dietitian: Level Up Your Lunches
March 30, 2023
ASK A DIETITIAN: Add These 6 Foods to Your Plate This Spring
February 09, 2023
Ask a Dietitian: Fuel Up for Your Marathon or Half Marathon
November 10, 2022
Align the Mind - To Look Forward, Look in the Mirror and Reflect
October 10, 2022
Ask A Dietitian - Squash: Healthy, Versatile & In Season Now
March 10, 2022
Align the Mind - Women, You Can!
January 10, 2022
Ask a Dietitian - 3 Healthy Habits to Last a Lifetime
View More