BAŞLIK: Ten Things You Need to Know About Sports Nutrition
KAYNAK: https://acsm.org/ten-sports-nutrition-facts/
TARİH: 2026-03-08 21:24:09
KELİME: 1159
============================================================

Skip to content
Ten Things You Need to Know About Sports Nutrition
Published Date:
December 17, 2024
Dan Benardot, PhD, DHC, RDN, FACSM
He literally
wrote the book
on sports nutrition, now Dr. Dan Benardot shares ten crucial things that you need to know about nutrition for athletic performance.
Look Beyond “Body Weight” When Determining Health and Fitness
It’s not your weight that matters, it’s what constitutes your weight. Find a way to learn if you have too little muscle or too much fat and find a strategy (exercise and eating well) that increases muscle and lowers fat. The number on the scale might stay the same, but since muscle takes up less space than fat you will look better, have a higher strength: weight ratio that enhances performance, and will be healthier.
Building Muscle Takes More Than Just Protein
Building muscle requires a combination of:
Added resistance to muscles
Staying in a good energy balanced state throughout the day to encourage anabolic hormone production
Exposing tissues to a good distribution of nutrients to sustain tissue health
Adequate sleep
Consuming carbohydrate and protein in the right amounts and at the right times to encourage muscle protein synthesis rather than muscle protein breakdown
Protein: It’s Not Just More, But When and How Much
If you’re and athlete, you need about double the protein as nonathletes, but just eating more protein isn’t enough. It must be consumed in the right amounts, at the right times, and when in a reasonably good energy balanced state. Randomly eating more protein doesn’t accomplish what the body needs.
Infrequent Meals Cause Problems
Meal skipping, or eating in a pattern that fails to satisfy energy requirements in real time, creates many problems including higher body fat levels, lower lean mass, and greater cardiometabolic risk factors. Interestingly, more frequent eating is associated with lower total caloric intake because of better ghrelin (appetite hormone) control. Eating when in a low blood sugar state, which is inevitable with an infrequent eating pattern, results in a hyper-insulinemic response and higher fat storage, regardless of what foods consumed.
Eating Good Foods Helps the Microbiome Keep You Healthy
Inadequate intake of fresh fruits and vegetables may negatively alter the microbiome, resulting in higher body fat percentage and reduced athletic performance. Consuming plenty of fresh fruits and vegetables helps to sustain good bacterial colonies that live in the gut. Additional benefit: Fruits and vegetables give you the carbs and phytonutrients that are needed for optimizing athletic performance.
Good Food, Bad Food, Wrong Choice
There is no perfect food, and if you keep eating the same food(s) because you believe it’s good for you, you place yourself at nutritional risk. There is no substitute for eating a wide variety of foods that are well-distributed throughout the day. You don’t get too much of anything potentially bad, and you expose tissues to all the nutrients they need.
Relative Energy Deficiency in Sport (RED-S) can be a Problem
The best exercise performance occurs when you have enough energy to support the exercise. Many athletes frequently post-load by consuming the energy (calories) they needed for the exercise after the exercise is finished, potentially resulting in a wide spectrum of negative health and performance consequences. You can’t drive your car on an empty tank of gas, and neither can you perform well if your tank is empty. Never overfill the tank, and never let it go to empty.
Poor Hydration, Poor Performance
Sustaining the best possible fluid balance is important for many reasons, including sustaining heart stroke volume, sustaining sweat rates, enabling delivery of nutrients to working cells and enhancing removal of metabolic waste products from cells.
Recovery from Exercise is Just as Important as the Exercise
Putting stress on muscles through exercise isn’t enough to reap the full health and performance benefits the exercise should provide. You must give muscles an opportunity to recover from the stress so that they can benefit from the exercise. Planning on having appropriate foods/drinks to consume immediately after the exercise is important. Adequate sleep also is important by helping to sustain appropriate eating behaviors and muscle recovery.
It Is Important to Learn How to Lower Stress
Stress levels impact eating behavior. High stress levels can lead to the consumption of energy-dense foods that are high in fat and sugar, resulting in a higher body fat level and lowering the strength: weight ratio. Find a strategy you can regularly follow for stress-reduction that can help you sustain optimal nutrition, which will positively influence both performance and health.
Ready to learn more? Check out
ACSM’s Nutrition for Exercise Science, second edition
!
Dan Benardot, PhD, DHC, RDN, FACSM,
is Teaching Professor in the Center for the Study of Human Health at Emory University and is Professor Emeritus of Nutrition at Georgia State University. He is the author of title
ACSM’s Nutrition for Exercise Science, second edition
.
Share this post
Other Related Posts
News Release
,
Certification Blog
ACSM and ACE Announce 2027 Health & Fitness Summit in Chicago
Two of the industry’s leading authorities unite to deliver an unmatched in-person learning experience for exercise professionals INDIANAPOLIS and SAN
Mar 6 2026
7 min read
News Release
,
ACSM History
,
Certification Blog
ACSM Honors Shannon Fitzgerald as 2026 Certified Professional of the Year
INDIANAPOLIS, IN — The American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM) proudly announces Shannon K. Fitzgerald, MSN, BS, RN, CV-BC, CCRP,
Mar 5 2026
5 min read
Certification Blog
,
Certification Exam Preparation
,
Faculty/Educator Resource
ACSM Certification Exam Testing Windows: What Faculty Need to Know
Starting February 2025, the ACSM Certification Board (CCRB) implemented a 3-month testing-window structure as a part of the new ACSM association management system (AMS) and to align with credentialing best practices.  Exam Coupon Expiration
Mar 4 2026
2 min read
View all Blog Posts
GSSI Pre-Conference
The Physiology of Hydration: More Than Water Alone
This session explores the physiology of hydration through an integrated lens—examining how carbohydrate, sodium, flavor, and fluid interact to influence intake, absorption, retention, and performance. We’ll review current research on fluid balance, osmotic drivers, and palatability, highlighting mechanisms that underpin voluntary intake and thermoregulation. Attendees will gain insight into individualized strategies, including sweat profiling and timing approaches, to optimize euhydration and mitigate performance decrements associated with >2% body-mass loss. Practical applications will be linked to laboratory- and field-based research, ensuring translation from bench to field. This pre-conference equips you with evidence-based tools to support athlete hydration across diverse environments and sporting contexts.
Session 1:
Sweating the detail: New insights on hydration considerations for athlete performance
Lewis James, PhD, Associate Professor in Human Nutrition in the School of Sport, Exercise and Health Sciences at Loughborough University
Session 2:
Functional ingredients in fluid replacement beverages for athletes
Lindsay Baker, PhD, Director at the Gatorade Sports Science Institute
Session 3:
The hydration toolkit: Practical approaches to athlete support
Floris Wardenaar, PhD, Associate Professor at the College of Health Solutions at Arizona State University